Computer accounts can be classified based on their purpose or role in a system. Here's an overview:
1. User Accounts

    Administrator Account: Has full control over the system, allowing changes to system settings, software installations, and user management.

    Standard User Account: Meant for daily use; limited privileges to prevent accidental system changes or security breaches.

    Guest Account: Temporary account with minimal privileges, often used for short-term access.

2. Service Accounts

    System Service Accounts: Used by applications and services to run tasks automatically (e.g., Splunk service account).

    Daemon Accounts: Specific to Unix/Linux systems, meant for background processes like web servers or database management.

3. Group Accounts

    Accounts associated with a group of users, often used in organizations to provide shared access and permissions (e.g., a "developers" group).

4. Domain Accounts

    Accounts managed by a central server in a network domain, allowing users to log in and access shared resources across multiple systems.

5. Technical or Role-Based Accounts

    Root Account: A Unix/Linux account with absolute control over the system; only to be used for administrative tasks.

    SSH Accounts: Used for secure remote access to servers.

    Proxy Accounts: Facilitates indirect access to resources, often for security purposes.

6. Cloud Accounts

    Accounts used to access and manage cloud services (e.g., AWS or Azure accounts), often tied to a user's identity.





Splunk uses a dedicated service account for its operations, usually called splunk (or an account you create specifically during installation). Here's how it works and why it's important:

    Purpose: The Splunk service account is responsible for running Splunk's processes (like splunkd). It ensures that Splunk operates in a secure and isolated manner, without interfering with other system users or processes.

    Permissions: This account typically owns all Splunk-related files and directories (e.g., /opt/splunk). It must have sufficient privileges to read logs, write configurations, and execute tasks within Splunk.

    Avoid Common Pitfalls: Changing the ownership of Splunk files to a different user (like your personal account) can break functionality, as Splunk's internal processes expect to run under the designated service account.

If you need to perform administrative tasks without switching users, you can do this:
bash

sudo -u splunk ./splunk start

Key Takeaway: Always ensure Splunk files are owned by the splunk user and avoid directly using the service account for tasks unrelated to Splunk.
SSH Accounts

An SSH account is used to enable secure, remote access to a system over the network. Here's the lowdown:

    Purpose: It ensures encrypted communication between the client (your computer) and the server, protecting data like login credentials and commands.

    Setup:

        User Account: Typically, you connect using a specific user account on the remote system (e.g., ssh user@remote_host).

        Key-based Authentication: For improved security, SSH accounts often use key pairs (public and private keys) instead of passwords. You can generate an SSH key with:
        bash

    ssh-keygen -t rsa

    Then, add the public key (id_rsa.pub) to the remote system under ~/.ssh/authorized_keys.

    Service Accounts: In some setups, service-specific accounts might be used for automating tasks (e.g., deploying code via CI/CD pipelines).

Best Practices:

    Use key-based authentication instead of passwords.

    Restrict SSH access to trusted users via /etc/ssh/sshd_config (e.g., AllowUsers yashodhar).

    Regularly monitor SSH logs (/var/log/auth.log on Linux) for unusual activity.
